Now, my discussion is about
the miracle of prayer.
What is one of the foremost ways
we draw close to, we stay close to, Jehovah?
By means of prayer.
In prayer, we experience Jehovah’s love
in a truly intimate way.
The Watchtower some years ago
made this comment:
“Be assured that
through the miracle of prayer
Jehovah is able to listen to you.”
And that’s very appropriate
—to describe prayer as a miracle.
Let’s think about it.
You can pray in any language,
even though according to some linguists
there are more than 6,800 languages
spoken on the earth today.
Jehovah knows all those languages.
Now, we’re impressed if a person knows
two or three languages.
Jehovah knows every language,
and that includes
the, perhaps, 300 sign languages
being used on earth today,
according to one encyclopedia.
Jehovah knows every sign language.
In fact, our prayer can be a silent prayer
uttered only in the privacy of our heart.
Amazingly, if a faithful servant of Jehovah
does not even know what to pray for
because of the perplexity of the situation
or his mental anguish,
according to Romans 8:26,
the holy spirit can, in effect,
formulate a prayer in his behalf.
Now, that is truly miraculous.
And as we know,
Jehovah has not delegated
the hearing of a prayer to anyone
—not even his Son.
Psalm 65:2 calls Jehovah
the “Hearer of prayer.”
And “Hearer” is singular.
But here’s a question:
What is prayer?
Well, some have defined it
as talking to Jehovah.
But is that really accurate?
Go to Genesis chapter 3, please.
Let’s use this scripture to answer that
—if it’s just talking to Jehovah.
Genesis 3:9:
“And Jehovah God kept calling to the man
and saying to him:
‘Where are you?’
“Finally, he [Adam] said:
“‘I heard your voice in the garden,
but I was afraid because I was naked
so I hid myself.’”
Well, clearly, Adam was talking to Jehovah,
but it was not prayer.
And we have numerous other examples
in the Bible.
So, appropriately,
the Insight  book defines prayer
as “worshipful address to the true God.”
And then it adds:
“[It] involves devotion, trust, respect,
“and a sense of dependence
on the one to whom the prayer is directed.”
So that’s a very good point.
If we want Jehovah to view our prayer
as not just talking to him but truly prayer,
we’ve got to make sure
it is worshipful address
and that we attach devotion, trust,
respect, a deep sense
of dependence on Jehovah.
And, obviously, that would require
that we prepare our hearts
before we pray to Jehovah.
Ezra 7:10—Ezra “prepared his heart.”
Well, we would do well to do the same.
But now, here’s another question,
What are the different types of prayer?
Well, our publications have explained
that there are basically
four types of prayer.
We have petition, supplication,
thanksgiving, and praise.
And if you boil it down even further,
you can say there are two types of prayer
—petition and thanksgiving—
because supplication is really
a form of petition
—just very deep petition, but petition.
And praise is a form of thanksgiving
—thanking Jehovah
for being the God that he is.
But now, let’s briefly talk about
these four categories of prayer
we can divide it into.
Take first, petition.
Just like it sounds, we’re asking
—we’re requesting—of Jehovah.
And Jehovah encourages us
to ask him for our needs.
At Matthew 7:7, Jesus said:
“Keep on asking, and it will be given you;
“keep on seeking, and you will find;
keep on knocking,
and it will be opened to you.”
And, of course, Jesus gives us things
we can pray for
—our daily bread,
forgiveness of our sins,
deliverance from the evil one
as a few examples.
But now, let’s take supplication.
The Watchtower explains
that “the word means ‘earnest entreaty,’
. . . ‘beseeching prayer.’”
It involves imploring God very earnestly
as in time of great stress or peril.
If you want to think of
a modern example of supplication,
think of a wife’s prayer
the night before her husband is executed
for keeping his integrity
—that would truly be supplication.
Now, let’s go to thanksgiving.
As it sounds,
it’s the rendering of thanks to Jehovah.
And how voluminous are the things
for which we should express
gratitude to Jehovah!
We think about all the material,
or physical, gifts
that not only make life possible
but make it enjoyable.
‘Every good gift and every perfect present
comes from Jehovah.’
—James 1:17.
And then what about the spiritual gifts
that Jehovah showers upon us
—the benefits of that ransom sacrifice,
the holy spirit, God’s Word,
the Christian congregation,
our marvelous Kingdom hope,
just to mention a few things?
It is only right that we thank Jehovah
for the things he has done,
is doing,
and will yet do in the future.
As Paul said at Ephesians 5:20,
we should be “always giving thanks
to our God and Father
for everything.”
But now, let’s move to praise.
Praise is a noble, exalted form of prayer,
as we said before,
closely related to thanksgiving.
We could look at it this way.
Thanksgiving—we thank Jehovah
for the gifts he gives us;
praise—we thank Jehovah
for being the God he is
and for the qualities he has
that we appreciate so much.
See, one brother said
that praise is “bragging on Jehovah.”
And that really harmonizes with
what Paul said at 1 Corinthians 1:31:
“The one who boasts,
let him boast in Jehovah.”
Jehovah is above all others.
He is certainly deserving of praise.
Exodus 15:11 tells us this.
It says: “Who among the gods
“is like you, O Jehovah?
“Who is like you,
showing yourself mighty in holiness?
“The One to be feared with songs of praise,
the One doing wonders.”
Yes, Jehovah is worthy
of our words in our songs of praise.
Well, there we have four types of prayer.
We mentioned petition, supplication,
thanksgiving, and praise.
And, obviously, we should endeavor
to try to balance our prayers
using a combination
of these different aspects of prayer.
Now, if we’re not especially careful,
there’s a danger
that our prayers could become
lopsided with petition.
Now that would not be good, would it?
In fact, I think of a survey
that the Awake! commented on
in “Watching the World,”
a survey among people who prayed.
And among those who still pray,
that survey showed
that for most of them,
their prayers are only petitions.
And then it said that they view God
like a divine Santa Claus:
“Give me this.
Give me that.
Help me with this.
Do this for me.”
We wouldn’t want our prayers
to even slightly take on
a selfish tenor like that.
And what probably is
the weakest aspect of most prayers?
Probably praise.
If we’re not careful, our prayers
could lack sufficient praise for Jehovah.
And it would be sad
because he is so deserving of praise.
Well, may we “persevere in prayer.”
—Romans 12:12.
May we “pray constantly.”
—1 Thessalonians 5:17.
And may we strive to keep
our prayers balanced and heartfelt
—truly “worshipful address”
to our heavenly Father.
And this will help us to draw close
and stay close
to our wonderful heavenly Father.